Benchmarking and profiling pre-trained ResNet50 inference across PyTorch Eager, PyTorch Compiled, and Core ML backends using Metal System Trace on a MacBook Pro M4 Pro

NOTE: torch 2.7.0 is the latest version that has been tested with coremltools 9.0, but torch.compile on mps is experimental on version 2.7.0

Inference Benchmarking & Profiling Data:
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1vuUf47wj6R930EpwFpNKTHKsXw0Jz0PX1xqlmF9NMDQ/edit?gid=0#gid=0

PyTorch Compiled execution granted a 1.26x speedup in _Mean Inference Latency_ over PyTorch Eager, while Core ML granted a 1.97x speedup in _Mean Inference Latency_ over PyTorch Eager. This resulted in proportional gains in _Inference Throughput_ over PyTorch Eager for both PyTorch Compiled and Core ML (25.84% and 97.08% respectively).

In comparison to PyTorch Eager execution, PyTorch Compiled allowed for greater kernel dispatch and efficiency. _Average Compute Shader Launch Utilization_ was 126.47% higher, resulting in _Average Compute SIMD Groups Inflight_ being 48.04% higher. Additionally, _Average Kernel Occupancy_ was 48.08% higher, resulting in _Average Total Occupancy_ being 45.19% higher. These performance gains can be explained by the differences in PyTorch Eager and PyTorch Compiled execution. In Eager mode, PyTorch executes operations immediately as Python interprets them line by line. This is convenient in terms of debugging and program control flow, but incurs Python interpreter/kernel launch overhead on each operation and does not allow for cross-operation optimization (as operations are "seen" independently line by line). However in Compiled mode, PyTorch traces the Python code to capture a computational graph. This graph is then further optimized (via techniques such as operator fusion), producing a joint forward/backward graph ahead of time. This optimized computational graph is then compiled to kernels, and the artifact is cached. This results in lower Python interpreter/kernel launch overhead, as subsequent calls skip re-tracing and simply execute the compiled optimized kernels. The increases in _Average Compute Shader Launch Utilization_ and _Average Compute SIMD Groups Inflight_ could be attributed to this decreased Python interpreter/kernel launch overhead, while the increases in _Average Kernel Occupancy_ and _Average Total Occupancy_ could be attributed to better GPU hardware utilization by the optimized kernels themselves.

In comparison to PyTorch Eager execution, Core ML allowed for more efficient memory access and usage. _Average GPU Bandwidth_ was 79.84% lower, similarly _Max GPU Bandwidth_ was 41.72% lower. Additionally, _Average Buffer L1 Miss Rate_ was 64.27% lower. Similarly to PyTorch Compiled, Core ML also builds a computational graph and applies graph-level optimizations at conversion time. However, Core ML does not track a backward graph or do gradient computation as it is designed specifically for inference (forward passes). The largest difference between both PyTorch execution models and Core ML is compute partitioning. In PyTorch you have to explicitly select the device (.to('mps') in this case), whereas Core ML automatically partitions the graph across compute units (CPU and GPU in this case). Core ML essentially makes computation more efficient due to this partitioning, choosing per-operation or per-subgraph placement (based on operator/data type, device capabilities, etc.). On Apple Silicon, compute units also share unified memory - meaning data does not need to be copied or transferred across memory spaces. Core ML takes advantage of this aggressively, which may help explain why its memory metrics are significantly better than those of PyTorch Eager and PyTorch Compiled across the board.
